Big O (#39)
Ada-Developers-Academy/core-unit-1: big-o/time-and-space-complexity.md

# Time and Space Complexity

## Learning Goals

- Define time and space complexity

## Introduction

Computers run our programs pretty quickly. For our projects, when we run the code or run the tests, it takes a fraction of a second, sometimes maybe one or two seconds. Our computers use a tiny bit of memory while running the program.

> However, those fractions of seconds add up. And what would happen if a computer did not have enough memory to hold everything in your code? In programming, we love to think in hypotheticals, and a hypothetical to constantly think about is, "What would happen if our data set was millions of items?"

Author: I appreciate this; I personally have a bad habit of only imagining Big O as "theoretical" consequences.

I'll update this soon to be less "this is all theory," and more "there are consequences!"

I will likely still keep the language of "imagine a million" since that ends up being:
1. a nice hyperbole that will stick out to students and get the point across
2. it's used as a thread throughout the text :P

> With a data set infinitely large, does our program slow down dramatically? Or slowly? Does our program take a very large amount of memory space?

Author: Awesome, thank you! I'll reword the idea of "infinitely large" to the appropriate and accurate thought experiment. I'll probably copy/paste your question that you suggested at the end there :P I'll likely make these changes and merge, so lmk if you wanted more of a back-and-forth through Slack.

> Ultimately, the machine that runs programs has limits, whether it's time or memory. Considering how fast and how much space our code is leads us to better code. Code that is fast or doesn't take a lot of memory is considered to be efficient.

Author: This is awesome!!!!! Thank you so much; I totally follow you and like it.

I'll think about a way to highlight processing power; there'll be a very limited "computer parts primer" in week one that will touch on the CPU as an idea, so it'll be good to use this moment to reinforce that lesson.

> Ultimately, the machine that runs programs has limits, whether it's time or memory. Considering how fast and how much space our code is leads us to better code. Code that is fast or doesn't take a lot of memory is considered to be efficient.

Author: ```suggestion
Ultimately, the machine that runs programs has limits, whether it's time or memory. Machines have limited processing power and memory. Considering how much computing time and memory a program running our code consumes leads us to writing better code. Code that is fast or doesn't take a lot of memory is considered to be efficient.
```

Took your suggestion and did a Thing with the first sentence; I'm wanting the first sentence to feel snappy and use that "time" and "space (memory)" language first, and then add parallel details.

Again, I'll think about an additional way to reinforce the CPU's role!

| Efficient        | A quality of code that means it is fast, and/or it does not take up much memory                    | -        | "My code is so slow, it takes a minute to finish running with this data set! I should refactor it to be more efficient." |
| Time Complexity  | A measurement of how the amount of time an algorithm takes to run as the size of the input changes |
| Space Complexity | A measurement of how much memory an algorithm uses as the size of the input changes                   |

## Considering the Algorithm

We consider time and space complexity with regards to _algorithms._ Algorithms are a set of instructions to follow, given some input. As programmers, that input is usually a data set.

## Time Complexity is How Long It Takes

Whenever we run an algorithm, our computer runs a series of **operations,** or set of instructions.

Given an algorithm with some input, how many operations does it do?

When the size of the input data set grows by one, how many more operations does our algorithm do?

When the size of the input data grows by a million, how many more operations does our algorithm do?

> Time complexity is the measurement of how the amount of time an algorithm takes to run as the size of the input changes. Time complexity is usually measured in number of operations.

Author: I like this, and normally would accept this fully, but the lesson ends up using the word "operations" as the concept to count when calculating time complexity.

Does the sentence "Time complexity is usually measured in number of CPU operations." hold up as accurate, if we conflate it with the operations to count?

(I think the answer is yes, this holds up, but I'd still love to hear if yo have thoughts on this)

I'm copying/pasting this convo to Slack in a DM to you, so I can have movement on this PR/merge and close it :P

- Use a bookmark you inserted before that is labeled "Taylor", that leads straight to Taylor's phone number.

Re-read the examples again. If you had a million contacts, which of these would methods would be suddenly more burdensome? Which methods would only be a little more difficult?

When we compare how many operations these algorithms take, we are considering their **_time complexity._**

## Space Complexity is How Much Memory is Required

Whenever we run an algorithm, our computer uses memory. Every variable, literal, reference, and object in our program takes up a small (or large) block of memory.

Given an algorithm with some input, how many variables do we put in memory?

When our data set grows by one or a million, how many more variables are stored in memory?

Space complexity is the measurement of how the amount of memory an algorithm uses as the size of the input changes.

### !callout-info

## It Uses Memory? But I Didn't Save Anything

> We say our computer uses memory, but there are no extra files. Wouldn't our computer run out of memory if we ran any program millions of times? Unless your program installs, downloads, saves, or writes something specifically to the computer, running programs use different kind of computer memory. Ideally, after a program finishes running, all the temporary memory from the program is released, deleted, and freed up, for more programs to run.

Author: I should really read all of the comments before replying to the comments. 😆 

I might hit you up for a suggestion on what to include on such a document, but it'll happen!

> We say our computer uses memory, but there are no extra files. Wouldn't our computer run out of memory if we ran any program millions of times? Unless your program installs, downloads, saves, or writes something specifically to the computer, running programs use different kind of computer memory. Ideally, after a program finishes running, all the temporary memory from the program is released, deleted, and freed up, for more programs to run.

Reviewer: happy to discuss more on slack :-)

> We say our computer uses memory, but there are no extra files. Wouldn't our computer run out of memory if we ran any program millions of times? Unless your program installs, downloads, saves, or writes something specifically to the computer, running programs use different kind of computer memory. Ideally, after a program finishes running, all the temporary memory from the program is released, deleted, and freed up, for more programs to run.

Author: Looking through this again...

I will change this verbiage at the same time that the hardware primer is published, to ensure that there's consistent language/thinking between the lessons

This is why people say to close your programs if your computer is running slowly!

### !end-callout

### Example: Finding Taylor in an Address Book With Little Resources

Different algorithms use different amounts of memory. Let's return to our address book problem as an example:

Finding your friend Taylor's phone number in an address book. (A physical one, with bound pages.)

Read through the algorithms that have slightly different details. Consider how much **_space_** each algorithm takes-- how many pages are used? How many other tools are used?

> - Start at the first page of the address book. Read through each page. If you see Taylor's name, you have found their phone number. Each contact gets their own page in the address book.

Author: ```suggestion
- Each contact gets their own page in the address book. Start at the first page of the address book. Read through each page. If you see Taylor's name, you have found their phone number.
```

**\*Space complexity** is considering how much space an algorithm takes.

## Best, Worst, and Average Cases

We could consider performance of an algorithm in three different scenarios: best case, worst case and average case scenarios.

- The best case scenario means a scenario where the algorithm finishes the most efficiently it could ever, truly, mathematically be
- The worst case scenario is the specific scenario where the algorithm would perform the most inefficiently
- The average case scenario would be the more common scenario that is neither the best nor worst case

### Example: The Address Book's Best, Worse, and Average Case

- Let's consider our example, finding our friend "Taylor" in our address book.

Let's pick a specific algorithm: Start at the first page of the address book. Read through each page. If you see Taylor's name, you have found their phone number.

- The best case scenario is that Taylor's the very first contact we see. That didn't take any time at all!
- The worst case scenario is that Taylor is the very last contact, on the very last page, in the address book. With this algorithm, you would have read the entire address book to find one phone number

> - The average case scenario is that Taylor is somewhere in the middle.

Author: I'll reword this outside of this GH conversation, and I won't make a follow-up PR (sorry 😢 ). Let me know if you want to see the results of that and we can chat on Slack! ✨

If Taylor is the second contact or the second-to-last contact, is that kind of a best case scenario? Kind of a worst case scenario? It isn't; as programmers we can consider those cases to be average cases.

## We Compare Efficiency Between Algorithms

Given two algorithms, we can consider which algorithm is more efficient by comparing the time and space complexity.

We can consider time and space complexity by worst and average case, too. Considering the worst case scenario allows us to know how the program will do in the most critical positions. If an algorithm is to be used many times on many different instances, it may be more important to know the average execution time.

> An efficient algorithm is one that runs as fast as possible and requires as little computer memory as possible. We often have to settle for a trade-off between these two goals, compromising memory to make things faster, or speed to use less memory.

Author: ```suggestion
An efficient algorithm is one that runs as fast as possible and requires as little computer memory as possible. We often have to make a trade-off between these two goals. For any given algorithm, do we choose to use more memory to make our program faster, or settle for a slower program that uses less memory?

The answer will ultimately on the context of the algorithm! That being said, we use Big O to inform our decisions more confidently.
```

Love it! Doing some wordsmithing with that sentence; it began to be a run-on, and I want the paragraph to have some bite to it, so I flipped around some sentence structures.
